Rick's PR of Ryans routing PR (#16456)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/fundamentals/routing.md

* If the request is not a `GET` or if the URL is anything else, no route matches and an HTTP 404 is returned.

<a name="endpoint"></a>

The `MapGet` method is used to define an **endpoint**, that is, something that can be:

* Selected, by matching the URL and HTTP method.
* Executed, by running the delegate.

`UseEndpoints` is where endpoints are configured that can be matched and executed by the app. For example, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapPost*>, and [similar methods](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions) can be used to connect code to the routing system.
<!-- wire up doesn't MT - AS IN: can be used to wire up code -->
The ASP.NET Core framework extends the builder provided by `UseEndpoints`:
- [MapRazorPages for Razor Pages](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorPagesEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorPages*)
- [MapControllers for controllers](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.ControllerEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapControllers*)

> - [MapHub<THub> for SignalR](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.SignalR.HubRouteBuilder.MapHub*) <!-- Review required for URL change-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [MapHub\<THub> for SignalR](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.SignalR.HubRouteBuilder.MapHub*) <!-- Review required for URL change-->
```

Calling <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.AuthAppBuilderExtensions.UseAuthentication*> and <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.AuthorizationAppBuilderExtensions.UseAuthorization*> adds the authentication and authorization middleware. These middleware are placed between <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseRouting*> and `UseEndpoints` so that they can:

* See which endpoint was selected by `UseRouting`.
* Apply an authorization policy before <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseEndpoints*> dispatches to the endpoint.

<a name="metadata"></a>

### Endpoint metadata

In the preceding example, there are two endpoints, but only the health check endpoint has an authorization policy attached. If the request matches the health check endpoint, `/healthz`, an authorization check is performed. This demonstrates that endpoints can have extra data attached to them. This extra data is called endpoint **metadata**:

* The metadata can be processed by routing-aware middleware.
* The metadata can be of any .NET type.

## Routing concepts

> The routing system builds on top of the middleware pipeline by adding the powerful **endpoint** concept. Endpoints represent units of the app's functionality that are distinct from each other from the point of view of routing, or authorization, or any number of ASP.NET Core's systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The routing system builds on top of the middleware pipeline by adding the powerful **endpoint** concept. Endpoints represent units of the app's functionality that are distinct from each other in terms of routing, authorization, and any number of ASP.NET Core's systems.
```

monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-2.1'
ms.author: riande
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 1/25/2020
uid: fundamentals/routing
---
# Routing in ASP.NET Core

By [Ryan Nowak](https://github.com/rynowak), [Kirk Larkin](https://twitter.com/serpent5), and [Rick Anderson](https://twitter.com/RickAndMSFT)

::: moniker range=">= aspnetcore-3.0"

> Routing is responsible for matching incoming HTTP requests and dispatching those requests to the apps executable endpoints. [Endpoints](#endpoint) are the apps' units of executable request-handling code. Endpoints are defined in the app and configured when the app starts. The endpoint matching process can extract values from the request's URL, and those values can be used for request processing. Using endpoint information from the app, routing is also able to generate URLs that map to endpoints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Routing is responsible for matching incoming HTTP requests and dispatching those requests to the app's executable endpoints. [Endpoints](#endpoint) are the app's units of executable request-handling code. Endpoints are defined in the app and configured when the app starts. The endpoint matching process can extract values from the request's URL and use those values for processing the request. Using endpoint information from the app, routing is also able to generate URLs that map to endpoints.
```

Apps can configure routing using:

> - Controllers

Reviewer 2: Rather than making a suggestion for multiple, individual lines, I'll just point out that use of a trailing `.` isn't consistent across these bullets.

- Razor Pages
- SignalR
- gRPC Services
- Endpoint-enabled [middleware](xref:fundamentals/middleware/index) such as [Health Checks](xref:host-and-deploy/health-checks).

> - Delegates and Lambdas registered with routing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Delegates and lambdas registered with routing.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: The final two bullets end with a `.`, but the first four don't. I dunno which is preferred, so just pointing it out in case it matters.

This document covers low-level details of ASP.NET Core routing. For information on configuring routing:

* For controllers, see <xref:mvc/controllers/routing>.
* For Razor Pages conventions, see <xref:razor-pages/razor-pages-conventions>.

The endpoint routing system described in this document applies to ASP.NET Core 3.0 and later. For information on the previous routing system based on <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.IRouter>, use one of the following approaches:

* The version selector for a previous version.
* Select [ASP.NET Core 2.2 routing](https://docs.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/fundamentals/routing?view=aspnetcore-2.2)
* Select [ASP.NET Core 2.1 routing](https://docs.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/fundamentals/routing?view=aspnetcore-2.1)

[View or download sample code](https://github.com/aspnet/AspNetCore.Docs/tree/master/aspnetcore/fundamentals/routing/samples/3.x) ([how to download](xref:index#how-to-download-a-sample))

The download samples for this document are enabled by a specific `Startup` class. To run a specific sample, modify *Program.cs* to call the desired `Startup` class.

> Many of the samples in this document use the following `ControllerContextExtensions`class to display <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.Abstractions.ActionDescriptor> information:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many of the samples in this document use the following `ControllerContextExtensions` class to display <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.Abstractions.ActionDescriptor> information:
```

The following code shows a basic example of routing:

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/Startup.cs?name=snippet&highlight=8,10)]

Routing uses a pair of middleware, registered by <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseRouting*> and <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseEndpoints*>:

* `UseRouting` adds route matching to the middleware pipeline. This middleware looks at the set of endpoints defined in the app, and selects the [best match](#urlm) based on the request.
* `UseEndpoints` adds endpoint execution to the middleware pipeline. It runs the delegate associated with the selected endpoint.

The preceding example includes a single *route to code* endpoint using the [MapGet](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*) method:

* When an HTTP `GET` request is sent to the root URL `/`:
  * The request delegate shown executes.
  * `Hello World!` is written to the HTTP response. By default, the root URL `/` is `http://localhost:5000/`.

> * If the request is not a `GET` or if the URL is anything else, no route matches and an HTTP 404 is returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If the request method is not `GET` or the root URL is not `/`, no route matches and an HTTP 404 is returned.
```

### Endpoint

<a name="endpoint"></a>

> The `MapGet` method is used to define an **endpoint**, that is, something that can be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `MapGet` method is used to define an **endpoint**. An endpoint is something that can be:
```

* Selected, by matching the URL and HTTP method.
* Executed, by running the delegate.

> `UseEndpoints` is where endpoints are configured that can be matched and executed by the app. For example, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapPost*>, and [similar methods](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions) can be used to connect code to the routing system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Endpoints that can be matched and executed by the app are configured in `UseEndpoints`. For example, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapPost*>, and [similar methods](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions) connect request delegates to the routing system.
```

> The ASP.NET Core framework extends the builder provided by `UseEndpoints`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additional methods can be used to connect ASP.NET Core framework features to the routing system:
```

I'm not entirely sure about the wording of "ASP.NET Core framework features" here. How would you refer to the group of MVC, RP, gRPC, etc?

- [MapRazorPages for Razor Pages](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorPagesEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorPages*)
- [MapControllers for controllers](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.ControllerEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapControllers*)
- [MapHub\<THub> for SignalR](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.SignalR.HubRouteBuilder.MapHub*) 
- [MapGrpcService\<TService> for gRPC](xref:grpc/aspnetcore)

> The following code shows an example of routing with a more sophisticated route template:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows routing with a more sophisticated route template:
```

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/RouteTemplateStartup.cs?name=snippet)]

> The string `/hello/{name:alpha}` is a **route template**, and is used to configure how the endpoint is matched. In this case, the template matches with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The string `/hello/{name:alpha}` is a **route template**. It is used to configure how the endpoint is matched. In this case, the template matches:
```

* A URL like `/hello/Ryan`
* Any URL path that begins with `/hello/` followed by a sequence of alphabetic characters.  `:alpha` applies a route constraint that matches only alphabetic characters. [Route constraints](#route-constraint-reference) are explained later in this document.

The second segment of the URL path, `{name:alpha}`:

* Is bound to the `name` parameter.

> * The captured value is stored in [HttpRequest.RouteValues](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.HttpRequest.RouteValues*).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Is captured and stored in [HttpRequest.RouteValues](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.HttpRequest.RouteValues*).
```

The endpoint routing system described in this document is new as of ASP.NET Core 3.0. However, all versions of ASP.NET Core support the same set of route template features and route constraints.

> The following code shows an example of routing with [health checks](xref:host-and-deploy/health-checks) and authorization and middleware:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows routing with authorization and [health checks](xref:host-and-deploy/health-checks):
```

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/AuthorizationStartup.cs?name=snippet)]

[!INCLUDE[](~/includes/MTcomments.md)]

> This preceding demonstrates how:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The preceding example shows how:
```

* The authorization middleware can be used with routing.
* Endpoints can be used to configure authorization behavior.

> The <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.HealthCheckEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapHealthChecks*> call adds a health check endpoint. Chaining this call to <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.AuthorizationEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.RequireAuthorization*> attaches an authorization policy to the endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.HealthCheckEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapHealthChecks*> call adds a health check endpoint. Chaining <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.AuthorizationEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.RequireAuthorization*> on to this call attaches an authorization policy to the endpoint.
```

Calling <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.AuthAppBuilderExtensions.UseAuthentication*> and <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.AuthorizationAppBuilderExtensions.UseAuthorization*> adds the authentication and authorization middleware. These middleware are placed between <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseRouting*> and `UseEndpoints` so that they can:

* See which endpoint was selected by `UseRouting`.
* Apply an authorization policy before <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseEndpoints*> dispatches to the endpoint.

<a name="metadata"></a>

### Endpoint metadata

> In the preceding example there are two endpoints, but only the health check endpoint has an authorization policy attached. If the request matches the health check `/healthz` endpoint, an authorization check is performed. This demonstrates a feature of endpoints called **metadata**. Endpoints can have extra data attached:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the preceding example, there are two endpoints, but only the health check endpoint has an authorization policy attached. If the request matches the health check endpoint, `/healthz`, an authorization check is performed. This demonstrates that endpoints can have extra data attached to them. This extra data is called endpoint **metadata**:
```

> * The extra data attached is called metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

* There is no remaining text and no remaining route template, so this is a match.

Here's an example of a negative case using the same template `/a{b}c{d}` and the URL path `/aabcd`. The `|` is used to help visualize how the algorithm works. This case isn't a match, which is explained by the same algorithm:
* The first literal, right to left, is `c`. So `/aabcd` is searched from right and finds `/aab|c|d`.
* Everything to the right (`d`) is now matched to the route parameter `{d}`.
* The next literal, right to left, is `a`. So `/aab|c|d` is searched starting where we left off, then `a` is found `/a|a|b|c|d`.
* The value to the right (`b`) is now matched to the route parameter `{b}`.
* At this point there is remaining text `a`, but the algorithm has run out of route template to parse, so this is not a match.

Since the matching algorithm is [non-greedy](#greedy):

* It matches the smallest amount of text possible in each step.
* Any case where the delimiter value appears inside the parameter values results in not matching.

Regular expressions provide much more control over their matching behavior.

<a name="greedy"></a>

> #### Greedy route matching

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure we we have a heading just for this definition, this just explains some of the terminology used in the complex segment discussion, and it doesn't really apply to routing (we don't have features that do greedy matching).

| `minlength(value)` | `{username:minlength(4)}` | `Rick` | String must be at least 4 characters |
| `maxlength(value)` | `{filename:maxlength(8)}` | `MyFile` | String must be no more than 8 characters |
| `length(length)` | `{filename:length(12)}` | `somefile.txt` | String must be exactly 12 characters long |
| `length(min,max)` | `{filename:length(8,16)}` | `somefile.txt` | String must be at least 8 and no more than 16 characters long |
| `min(value)` | `{age:min(18)}` | `19` | Integer value must be at least 18 |
| `max(value)` | `{age:max(120)}` | `91` | Integer value must be no more than 120 |
| `range(min,max)` | `{age:range(18,120)}` | `91` | Integer value must be at least 18 but no more than 120 |
| `alpha` | `{name:alpha}` | `Rick` | String must consist of one or more alphabetical characters, `a`-`z` and case-insensitive. |
| `regex(expression)` | `{ssn:regex(^\\d{{3}}-\\d{{2}}-\\d{{4}}$)}` | `123-45-6789` | String must match the regular expression. See tips about defining a regular expression. |
| `required` | `{name:required}` | `Rick` | Used to enforce that a non-parameter value is present during URL generation |

> [!INCLUDE[](~/includes/regex.md)]

Reviewer 3: Not sure if you intended to include this warning twice, but it appears as well in the regex section, so I'll assume its intended.

We should probably add to this note that when **routing** instantiates regex on your behalf it always uses a timeout. The risk here only applies when YOU THE DEVELOPER write your own code to instantiate a regex object.

Author: Updated to:
> [!WARNING]
> When using <xref:System.Text.RegularExpressions> to process untrusted input, pass a timeout. A malicious user can provide input to `RegularExpressions` causing a [Denial-of-Service attack](https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas/tips/ST04-015). ASP.NET Core framework APIs that use `RegularExpressions` pass a timeout.

------------------- End of Update ----------
I was hoping to use the ~/includes/regex in all of our doc's where we show a regex. Let me know if that's OK.

To use a custom `IRouteConstraint`, the route constraint type must be registered with the app's <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.RouteOptions.ConstraintMap> in the service container. A `ConstraintMap` is a dictionary that maps route constraint keys to `IRouteConstraint` implementations that validate those constraints. An app's `ConstraintMap` can be updated in `Startup.ConfigureServices` either as part of a [services.AddRouting](xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.RoutingServiceCollectionExtensions.AddRouting*) call or by configuring <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.RouteOptions> directly with `services.Configure<RouteOptions>`. For example:

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/StartupConstraint.cs?name=snippet)]

The preceding constraint applied to a route in the following code:

```csharp
[HttpGet("{id:customName}")]
public ActionResult<string> Get(string id)
```

The following code implements `MyCustomConstraint`:
<!-- review: Review my implementation of MyCustomConstraint -->

> [!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/StartupConstraint.cs?name=snippet2)]

Reviewer 3: I still *****REALLLY***** do not like this sample. This duplicates features that are in the product.

> [!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/StartupConstraint.cs?name=snippet2)]

Author: @rynowak  wrote
> I really struggle to think of good examples, 

Exactly. We need an example with a warning do use this. The sample is something they can test/modify/etc to help them get starting writing one they need. 

> I still *****REALLLY***** do not like this sample. This duplicates features that are in the product.

You have a regex that prevents `0`? 

I have

The preceding code:

* Prevents `0` in the `{id}` segment of the route.
* Is shown to provide a basic example of implementing a custom constraint. It should not be used in a production app.

Feel free to suggest a better sample. We don't want a useful sample, but something very basic that's easy to test.

* It doesn't require a custom constraint.
* It returns a more descriptive error when the route parameter includes `0`.

## Parameter transformer reference

Parameter transformers:

* Execute when generating a link using <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.LinkGenerator>.
* Implement <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.IOutboundParameterTransformer?displayProperty=fullName>.
* Are configured using <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.RouteOptions.ConstraintMap>.
* Take the parameter's route value and transform it to a new string value.
* Result in using the transformed value in the generated link.

For example, a custom `slugify` parameter transformer in route pattern `blog\{article:slugify}` with `Url.Action(new { article = "MyTestArticle" })` generates `blog\my-test-article`.

Consider the following `IOutboundParameterTransformer` implementation:

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/StartupConstraint2.cs?name=snippet2)]

To use a parameter transformer in a route pattern, configure it using <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.RouteOptions.ConstraintMap> in `Startup.ConfigureServices`:

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/StartupConstraint2.cs?name=snippet)]

> In the preceding code,  replace the type and the name used to refer to the `ConstraintMap` with your `IOutboundParameterTransformer` implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Parameter transformers are used by the ASP.NET Core framework to transform the URI where an endpoint resolves. For example, ASP.NET Core uses parameter transformers to transform the route value used to match an `area`, `controller`, `action`, and `page`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ASP.NET Core framework uses parameter transformers to transform the URI where an endpoint resolves. For example, parameter transformers transform the route values used to match an `area`, `controller`, `action`, and `page`.
```

```csharp
routes.MapControllerRoute(
    name: "default",
    template: "{controller:slugify=Home}/{action:slugify=Index}/{id?}");
```

> With the preceding route, the action `SubscriptionManagementController.GetAll` is matched with the URI `/subscription-management/get-all`. A parameter transformer doesn't change the route values used to generate a link. For example, `Url.Action("GetAll", "SubscriptionManagement")` outputs `/subscription-management/get-all`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the preceding route template, the action `SubscriptionManagementController.GetAll` is matched with the URI `/subscription-management/get-all`. A parameter transformer doesn't change the route values used to generate a link. For example, `Url.Action("GetAll", "SubscriptionManagement")` outputs `/subscription-management/get-all`.
```

> ASP.NET Core provides API conventions for using a parameter transformers with generated routes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ASP.NET Core provides API conventions for using parameter transformers with generated routes:
```

> * The MVC <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ApplicationModels.RouteTokenTransformerConvention?displayProperty=fullName> convention applies a specified parameter transformer to all attribute routes in the app. The parameter transformer transforms attribute route tokens as they are replaced. For more information, see [Use a parameter transformer to customize token replacement](xref:mvc/controllers/routing#use-a-parameter-transformer-to-customize-token-replacement).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ApplicationModels.RouteTokenTransformerConvention?displayProperty=fullName> MVC convention applies a specified parameter transformer to all attribute routes in the app. The parameter transformer transforms attribute route tokens as they are replaced. For more information, see [Use a parameter transformer to customize token replacement](xref:mvc/controllers/routing#use-a-parameter-transformer-to-customize-token-replacement).
```

> * Razor Pages has the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ApplicationModels.PageRouteTransformerConvention> API convention. This convention applies a specified parameter transformer to all automatically discovered Razor Pages. The parameter transformer transforms the folder and file name segments of Razor Pages routes. For more information, see [Use a parameter transformer to customize page routes](xref:razor-pages/razor-pages-conventions#use-a-parameter-transformer-to-customize-page-routes).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Razor Pages uses the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ApplicationModels.PageRouteTransformerConvention> API convention. This convention applies a specified parameter transformer to all automatically discovered Razor Pages. The parameter transformer transforms the folder and file name segments of Razor Pages routes. For more information, see [Use a parameter transformer to customize page routes](xref:razor-pages/razor-pages-conventions#use-a-parameter-transformer-to-customize-page-routes).
```

<a name="ugr"></a>

## URL generation reference

> This section contains a reference for the algorithm implemented by URL generation. Most complex examples of URL generation in practice use controllers or Razor Pages. See  [routing in controllers](xref:mvc/controllers/routing) for additional information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section contains a reference for the algorithm implemented by URL generation. In practice, most complex examples of URL generation use controllers or Razor Pages. See  [routing in controllers](xref:mvc/controllers/routing) for additional information.
```

The first step is to use the address to resolve a set of candidate endpoints using an [`IEndpointAddressScheme<TAddress>`](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.IEndpointAddressScheme`1) that matches the address's type.

Once of set of candidates is found by the address scheme, the endpoints are ordered and processed iteratively until a URL generation operation succeeds. URL generation does **not** check for ambiguities, the first result returned is the final result.

### Troubleshooting URL generation with logging

The first step in troubleshooting URL generation is setting the logging level of `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing` to `TRACE`. `LinkGenerator` logs many details about its processing which can be useful to troubleshoot problems.

See [URL generation reference](#ugr) for details on URL generation.

### Addresses

Addresses are the concept in URL generation used to bind a call into the link generator to a set of candidate endpoints.

> Addresses are extensible concept that come with two implementations by default:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Addresses are an extensible concept that come with two implementations by default:
```

* Using *endpoint name* (`string`) as the address:
    * Provides similar functionality to MVC's route name.
    * Uses the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.IEndpointNameMetadata> metadata type.
    * Resolves the provided string against the metadata of all registered endpoints.
    * Throws an exception on startup if multiple endpoints use the same name.
    * Recommended for general-purpose use outside of controllers and Razor Pages.
* Using *route values* (<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.RouteValuesAddress>) as the address:
    * Provides similar functionality to controllers and Razor Pages legacy URL generation.
    * Very complex to extend and debug.
    * Provides the implementation used by `IUrlHelper`, Tag Helpers, HTML Helpers, Action Results, etc.

The role of the address scheme is to make the association between the address and matching endpoints by arbitrary criteria:

* The endpoint name scheme performs a basic dictionary lookup.
* The route values scheme has a complex best subset of set algorithm.

<a name="ambient"></a>

### Ambient values and explicit values

> From the current request, routing accesses the route values of the current request `HttpContext.Request.RouteValues`. The values associated with the current request are referred to as the **ambient values**. For the purpose of clarity, the documentation refers to the route values passed in to method as **explicit values**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the current request, routing accesses the route values of the current request `HttpContext.Request.RouteValues`. The values associated with the current request are referred to as the **ambient values**. For the purpose of clarity, the documentation refers to the route values passed in to methods as **explicit values**.
```

> This following examples shows ambient values and explicit values. The following code provides ambient values from the current request and explicit values: `{ id = 17, }`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows ambient values and explicit values. It provides ambient values from the current request and explicit values: `{ id = 17, }`:
```

* `/Gadget/Edit/17` is returned.
* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ControllerBase.Url> gets the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.IUrlHelper>.
* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.UrlHelperExtensions.Action*> 	
generates a URL with an absolute path for an action method. The URL contains the specified `action` name and `route` values.

The following code provides ambient values from the current request and explicit values: `{ page = "./Edit, id = 17, }`:

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/Pages/Index.cshtml.cs?name=snippet)]

The preceding code sets `url` to  `/Edit/17` when the Edit Razor Page contains the following page directive:

 `@page "{id:int}"`

If the Edit page doesn't contain the `"{id:int}"` route template, `url` is `/Edit?id=17`.

The behavior of MVC's <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.IUrlHelper> adds a layer of complexity in addition to the rules described here:

* `IUrlHelper` always provides the route values from the current request as ambient values.
* [IUrlHelper.Action](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.UrlHelperExtensions.Action*) always copies the current `action` and `controller` route values as explicit values unless overridden by the developer.

> * [IUrlHelper.Page](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.UrlHelperExtensions.Page*) always copies the current `page` route value as an explicit values unless overridden. <!--by the user-->.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [IUrlHelper.Page](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.UrlHelperExtensions.Page*) always copies the current `page` route value as an explicit value unless overridden. <!--by the user-->
```

* `IUrlHelper.Page` always overrides the current `handler` route value with `null` as an explicit values unless overridden.

> Users are often surprised by the behavioral details of ambient values, because MVC doesn't seem to follow its own rules. For historical and compatibility reasons certain route values  such as `action`, `controller`, `page`, and `handler` have their own special-case behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users are often surprised by the behavioral details of ambient values, because MVC doesn't seem to follow its own rules. For historical and compatibility reasons, certain route values  such as `action`, `controller`, `page`, and `handler` have their own special-case behavior.
```

The equivalent functionality provided by `LinkGenerator.GetPathByAction` and `LinkGenerator.GetPathByPage` duplicates these anomalies of `IUrlHelper` for compatibility.

### URL generation process

Once the set of candidate endpoints are found, the URL generation algorithm:

* Processes the endpoints iteratively.
* Returns the first successful result.

The first step in this process is called **route value invalidation**.  Route value invalidation is the process by which routing decides which route values from the ambient values should be used and which should be ignored. Each ambient value is considered and either combined with the explicit values, or ignored.

> The best way to think about the role of ambient values is that they attempt to save application developers typing in some common cases. Traditionally, the scenarios where ambient values are helpful are related to MVC:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The best way to think about the role of ambient values is that they attempt to save application developers typing, in some common cases. Traditionally, the scenarios where ambient values are helpful are related to MVC:
```

* When linking to another action in the same controller, the controller name doesn't need to be specified.
* When linking to another controller in the same area, the area name doesn't need to be specified.
* When linking to the same action method, route values don't need to be specified.
* When linking to another part of the app, you don't want to carry over route values that have no meaning in that part of the app.

Calls to `LinkGenerator` or `IUrlHelper` that return `null` are usually caused by not understanding route value invalidation. Troubleshoot route value invalidation by explicitly specifying more of the route values to see if that solves the problem.

> Route value invalidation works on the assumption that the app's URL scheme is hierarchical, with a hierarchy formed from left-to-right. Consider the the basic controller route template `{controller}/{action}/{id?}` to get an intuitive sense of how this works in practice. A **change** to a value **invalidates** all of the route values that appear to the right. This reflects the assumption about hierarchy. If the app has an ambient value for `id`, and the operation specifies a different value for the `controller`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Route value invalidation works on the assumption that the app's URL scheme is hierarchical, with a hierarchy formed from left-to-right. Consider the basic controller route template `{controller}/{action}/{id?}` to get an intuitive sense of how this works in practice. A **change** to a value **invalidates** all of the route values that appear to the right. This reflects the assumption about hierarchy. If the app has an ambient value for `id`, and the operation specifies a different value for the `controller`:
```

* `id` won't be reused because `{controller}` is to the left of `{id?}`.

Some examples demonstrating this principle:

> * If the explicit values contains a value for `id`, the ambient value for `id` is ignored. The ambient values for `controller` and `action` can be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If the explicit values contain a value for `id`, the ambient value for `id` is ignored. The ambient values for `controller` and `action` can be used.
```

> * If the explicit values contains a value for `action`, any ambient value for `action` is ignored. The ambient values for `controller` can be used. If the explicit value for `action` is different from the ambient value for `action`, the `id` value won't be used.  If the explicit value for `action` is the same as the ambient value for `action`, the `id` value can be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If the explicit values contain a value for `action`, any ambient value for `action` is ignored. The ambient values for `controller` can be used. If the explicit value for `action` is different from the ambient value for `action`, the `id` value won't be used.  If the explicit value for `action` is the same as the ambient value for `action`, the `id` value can be used.
```

> * If the explicit values contains a value for `controller`, any ambient value for `controller` is ignored. If the explicit value for `controller` is different from the ambient value for `controller`, the `action` and `id` values won't be used. If the explicit value for `controller` is the same as the ambient value for `controller`, the `action` and `id` values can be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If the explicit values contain a value for `controller`, any ambient value for `controller` is ignored. If the explicit value for `controller` is different from the ambient value for `controller`, the `action` and `id` values won't be used. If the explicit value for `controller` is the same as the ambient value for `controller`, the `action` and `id` values can be used.
```

This process is further complicated by the existence of attribute routes and dedicated conventional routes. Controller conventional routes such as `{controller}/{action}/{id?}` specify a hierarchy using route parameters. For [dedicated conventional routes](xref:mvc/controllers/routing#dcr) and [attribute routes](xref:mvc/controllers/routing#ar) to controllers and Razor Pages:

* There is a hierarchy of route values.
* They don't appear in the template.

For these cases, URL generation defines the **required values** concept. Endpoints created by controllers and Razor Pages have required values specified that allow route value invalidation to work.

The route value invalidation algorithm in detail:

* The required value names are combined with the route parameters, then processed from left-to-right.

> * For each parameter the ambient value and explicit value are compared:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For each parameter, the ambient value and explicit value are compared:
```

    * If the ambient value and explicit value are the same, the process continues.

>     * If the ambient value is present and the explicit value isn't, the ambient is used when generating the URL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * If the ambient value is present and the explicit value isn't, the ambient value is used when generating the URL.
```

    * If the ambient value isn't present and the explicit value is, reject the ambient value and all subsequent ambient values.
    * If the ambient value and the explicit value are present, and the two values are different, reject the ambient value and all subsequent ambient values.

At this point, the URL generation operation is ready to evaluate route constraints. The set of accepted values is combined with the parameter default values, which is provided to constraints. If the constraints all pass, the operation continues.

> Next the **accepted values** can be used to expand the route template. The route template is processed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, the **accepted values** can be used to expand the route template. The route template is processed:
```

### Problems with route value invalidation

As of ASP.NET Core 3.0, some URL generation schemes used in earlier ASP.NET Core versions don't work well with URL generation. The ASP.NET Core team plans to add features to address these needs in a future release. For now the best solution is to use legacy routing.

The following code shows an example of a URL generation scheme that's not supported by routing.

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/StartupUnsupported.cs?name=snippet)]

> In the preceding code, the `culture` route parameter is used for localization. The desire is to have the `culture` parameter always accepted as an ambient value. However the `culture` parameter is not accepted as an ambient value because of the way required values work:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the preceding code, the `culture` route parameter is used for localization. The desire is to have the `culture` parameter always accepted as an ambient value. However, the `culture` parameter is not accepted as an ambient value because of the way required values work:
```

## Host matching in routes with RequireHost

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RoutingEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.RequireHost*> applies a constraint to the route which requires the specified host. The `RequireHost` or [[Host]](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.HostAttribute) parameter can be:

* Host: `www.domain.com`, matches `www.domain.com` with any port.
* Host with wildcard: `*.domain.com`, matches `www.domain.com`, `subdomain.domain.com`, or `www.subdomain.domain.com` on any port.
* Port: `*:5000`, matches port 5000 with any host.
* Host and port: `www.domain.com:5000` or `*.domain.com:5000`, matches host and port.

Multiple parameters can be specified using `RequireHost` or `[Host]`. The constraint  matches hosts valid for any of the parameters. For example, `[Host("domain.com", "*.domain.com")]` matches `domain.com`, `www.domain.com`, and `subdomain.domain.com`.

The following code uses `RequireHost` to require the specified host on the route:

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/StartupRequireHost.cs?name=snippet)]

> The following code uses the `[Host]` attribute to require the specified host on the controller:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following code uses the `[Host]` attribute on the controller to require any of the specified hosts:
```

## Performance guidance for routing

Most of routing was updated in ASP.NET Core 3.0 to increase performance.

When an app has performance problems, routing is often suspected as the problem. The reason routing is suspected is that frameworks like controllers and Razor Pages report the amount of time spent inside the framework in their logging messages. When there's a significant difference between the time reported by controllers and the total time of the request:

* Developers eliminate their app code as the source of the problem.
* It's common to assume routing is the cause.

> Routing is performance tested using thousands of endpoints. It's unlikely that a typical app will encounter a performance problem just by being too large. The most common root cause of investigating routing performance is usually a badly-behaving custom middleware.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Routing is performance tested using thousands of endpoints. It's unlikely that a typical app will encounter a performance problem just by being too large. The most common root cause of slow routing performance is usually a badly-behaving custom middleware.
```

> This following code sample demonstrates a basic technique for narrowing down the source of delay.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This following code sample demonstrates a basic technique for narrowing down the source of delay:
```

});
```

> **DO** return a sealed concrete type from a call to `MapMyFramework(...)` that implements <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.IEndpointConventionBuilder>. Most of framework `Map...` methods follow this pattern. The `IEndpointConventionBuilder` interface:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**DO** return a sealed concrete type from a call to `MapMyFramework(...)` that implements <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.IEndpointConventionBuilder>. Most framework `Map...` methods follow this pattern. The `IEndpointConventionBuilder` interface:
```

### Creating routing-integrated middleware

**CONSIDER** defining metadata types as an interface.

**DO** make it possible to use metadata types as an attribute on classes and methods.

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/ICoolMetadata.cs?name=snippet2)]

Frameworks like controllers and Razor Pages support applying metadata attributes to types and methods. If you declare metadata types:

* Make them accessible as [attributes](/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/concepts/attributes/).
* Most users are familiar with applying attributes.

Declaring a metadata type as an interface adds another layer of flexibility:

* Interfaces are composable.
* Developers can declare their own types that combine multiple policies.

**DO** make it possible to override metadata, as shown in the following example:

[!code-csharp[](routing/samples/3.x/RoutingSample/ICoolMetadata.cs?name=snippet)]

The best way to follow these guidelines is to avoid defining **marker metadata**:

* Don't just look for the presence of a metadata type.
* Define a property on the metadata and check the property.

> The metadata collection is ordered and supports overriding by priority. In the case of controllers, a metadata on the action method is most specific.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The metadata collection is ordered and supports overriding by priority. In the case of controllers, metadata on the action method is most specific.
```

});
```

> As an example of this guideline, consider the `UseAuthorization` middleware. The authorization middleware allows you pass in a fallback policy. <!-- shown where?  (shown here) --> The fallback policy, if specified, applies to both:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example of this guideline, consider the `UseAuthorization` middleware. The authorization middleware allows you to pass in a fallback policy. <!-- shown where?  (shown here) --> The fallback policy, if specified, applies to both:
```

* Endpoints without a specified policy.
* Requests that don't match an endpoint.

> This makes the authorization middleware outside of the context of routing. The authorization middleware can be used for traditional middleware programming.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This makes the authorization middleware useful outside of the context of routing. The authorization middleware can be used for traditional middleware programming.
```
